How would you as a higher intelligence represent yourself to a lesser intelligence?
Do you think they saw what they say they saw?
It didn't just start showing up in 1947.
How hard do you think it is for aliens to communicate with humans?
What do we believe in? We believe in technology.
So you show yourself as a form of technology, right?
But the common thread is you're not alone.
And there's something else here with you.
And there's something that's, as you said, watching you.
You are a professor at Stanford studying the biology of the human organism at the
level of individual cells. So let me ask first the big ridiculous philosophical question.
What is the most beautiful or fascinating aspect of human biology at the level of the cell to you?
The micro machines and the nanomachines that proteins make and become that to me is the most
interesting. The fact that you have this basically dynamic computer within every cell that's
constantly processing its environment. And at the heart of it is DNA, which is a dynamic machine,
a dynamic computation process. People think of the DNA as a linear code.
It's codes within codes, within codes. And it is actually the epigenetic state that's doing this
amazing processing. I mean, if you ever wanted to believe in God, just look inside the cell.
So DNA is both information and computer. Exactly.
How did that computer come about? A big continue on the philosophical question.
Is this both scientific and philosophical? How did life originate on Earth, do you think?
How did this at every level, so the very first step and the fascinating complex computer that is
DNA, that is multicellular organism, and then maybe the fascinating complex computer that is
the human mind? Well, I think you have to take just one more step back to the complex computer
that is the universe, right? All of the so called particles or the waves that people think the
universe is made of and appears to me at least to be a computational process and embedded in that
is biology, right? So all the atoms of a protein, etc., sit in that computational matrix. From my
point of view, it's computing something. It's computing towards something. It was created
in some ways if you want to believe in God. And I don't know that I do, but if you want to believe
in something, the universe was created or at least enabled to allow for life to form. And so
the DNA, if you ask where does DNA come from, and you can go all the way back to Richard Dawkins
and the selfish gene hypotheses, the way I look at DNA though is it is not a moment in time.
It assumes the context of the body and the environment in which it's going to live. And so
if you want to ask a question of where and how does information get stored, DNA, although it's
only 3 billion base pairs long, contains more information than I think the entire computational
memory resources of our current technology. Because who and what you are is both what you
were as an egg all the way through to the day you die and it embodies all the different cell
types and organs in your body. And so it's a computational reservoir of information and expectation
that you will become. So actually, I would sort of turn it around a different way and say if you
wanted to create the best memory storage system possible, you could reverse engineer what a human
is and create a DNA memory system that is not just the linear version, but is also everything
that it could become. When we're talking about DNA, we're talking about Earth and the environment
creating DNA. So you're talking about trying to come up with an optimal computer for this
particular environment. Right. So if you reverse engineer that computer, what do you mean by
considering all the possible things it could become? So who you are today, right? So 3 billion
bits of information does not explain Lex Friedman, doesn't explain me, right? But the DNA embodies
the expectation of the environment in which you will live and grow and become. So all the
information that is you, right, is actually not only embedded in the DNA, but it's embedded
in the context of the world in which you grow into and develop, right? So all that information,
though, is packed in the expectation of what the DNA expects to see. Interesting. So some of the
information, is that accurate to say, is stored outside the body? Exactly. Yeah. The information
is stored outside because there's a context of expectation. Isn't that interesting? Yeah,
it's fascinating. I mean, to linger on this point, if we were to run Earth over again a million
times, how many different versions of this type of computer would we get? I think it would be
different each time. I mean, if you assume there's no such thing as fate, right, and it's not all
pre programmed, you know, and that there is some sort of, let's say, variation or randomness at
the beginning, you would get as many different versions of life as you could imagine. And I
don't think it would all be unless there's something built into the, you know, into the
substrate of the universe. It wouldn't always be left handed proteins, right? But I wonder what
the flap of a butterfly wing, what effects it has, because it's possible that this system is really
good at finding the efficient answer. And maybe the efficient answer is there's only a small finite
set of them for this particular environment. Exactly. Exactly. That's the kind of, in a way,
the anthropomorphic universe of the multiverse expectations, right? That, you know, there's
probably a zillion other kinds of universes out there, if you believe in multiverse theory.
We only live in the ones where the rules are such that life like ours can exist.
So using that logic, how many alien civilizations do you think are out there? There's, there's,
there's like trillions of environments, aka planets, or maybe you can think even bigger
than planets. How many life like organisms do you think are out there thriving? And maybe how
many do you think are long gone, but we're once here? I think, well, innumerable. I think in terms
of the greater than zero, much greater than zero. I mean, I would just be surprised what a waste,
right, of all that space just for us, if we're never going to get there. That would be my first
way to think about it. But second, I mean, I remember when I was about seven or eight years old,
and I would love if any of your listeners could find this National Geographic. I remember opening
the page of the National Geographic. I was about, again, seven to 10 years old. And it was sort of
a current picture of the universe. It was around probably 1968, 1969. I just remember looking at
it and thinking, what kinds of empires have risen and fallen across that space that we'll never
know about? And isn't that sad that we know nothing about something so grand? And so,
I've always been a reader of science fiction, because I like the creative ideas of what people
come up with. And I especially like science fiction writers that base it in good science,
but base it also in evolution. That if you evolve a civilization from something life like, right,
some sort of biology, its assumptions about the universe will come from the environment in which
it grew up. So for instance, Larry Niven is a great writer. And he imagines different kinds of
civilizations. In some cases, what happens if, what happens if intelligence evolved from a herd
animal, right? Would you lead from behind? Right? Would you be, you know, in his case,
one of them were the so called puppeteers. And to them, the moral imperative is cowardice.
You put other people forward to run the risk for you, right? And so he writes entire books around
that premise. There's another guy, Bryn, David Bryn, is his name, and he writes the so called
uplift universe books. And in those, he takes different intelligences, each from a different
evolutionary background. And then he posits a civilization based around where and what they
came from. And so to me, I mean, that's, that's just fun. But I mean, back to your original
question is how many are there, I think is as, as, as many stars as we can see. Now, how many
are currently there? I don't know. I mean, that's the whole, that's the whole question of, you know,
how long can a civilization last before it runs out of steam? In you, for instance, does it just
get bored? Or does it transcend to something else? Or does it say, I've seen enough and I'm done?
What does running out of steam look like? It could be destroy itself or get bored?
You know, or we've done everything we can, and they just decide to stop. I don't know. I just
don't know. It's that you almost worry that we stop reproducing, or we slow down the reproduction
rate to where the population can go to zero. Can go to zero and we can't and we collapse. I mean,
so the only way to get around that is perhaps create enough machines with AI to take care of us.
What could possibly go wrong? You've talked to people that told stories of UFO encounters.
What is the most fascinating to you about the stories of these UFO encounters that
you've heard that people have told you? The similarity of them, the uniformity of the stories.
Now, I just want to say up front, a lot of people think that when I speculate,
I believe something. That's not true, right? Speculation is just creativity. Speculation
is the beginning of hypothesis. None of what I hear in terms of the anecdotes do I necessarily
believe are they true? But I still find them fascinating to listen to because at some level,
there's still raw data. And you have to listen. And once you start to hear the same story again
and again, then you have to say, well, there might be something to it. I mean, maybe it's
some kind of a Jungian background in the human mind and human consciousness that creates these
stories again and again. It's coming out of the DNA. It's coming out of that pre programmed
something. And Jung talked quite a bit about this kind of thing, the collective unconscious.
But actually, one of the most interesting ones I find is this constant message
that you're not taking care of your world. And this came long before climate change. It came
long before many kinds of, let's say, current day memes around taking care of our planet,
pollution, etc. And so, you know, for instance, perhaps the best example of this, the one that
I find the most fascinating is a story out of Zimbabwe 50 or 60 children, one afternoon
in Zimbabwe. It's a, it was a well educated group of white and black children who end lunchtime
in the playground, saw a craft, and they saw little men. And they all ran into the teachers
and they told the same story and they drew the same pictures. And the message several of them got was,
you are not taking care of your planet. And it got, you know, there's actually a movie coming
out on this episode. And 30 years later, now, the people who are there, the children who've
now grown up say it, it happened to us. Now, did it happen? Was it some sort of hallucination?
Or was it an imposed hallucination by something? Was it material? I don't know. But
these kids were seven to 10 years old. You see them on video, seven to 10 year olds can't lie
like that. And so, you know, whether it's real or not, I don't know. But I find that fascinating
data. And again, it's that it's these unconnected stories of individuals with the same with the
same story. That is worthy of further inquiry. Yeah, so here we are humans with limited cognitive
capacities trying to make sense of the world, trying to understand what is real and not.
We have this DNA that somehow in complex ways is interacting with the environment.
And then we get these novel ideas that come from the populace. And then they make us wonder about
what it all means. And so how to interpret it. If you think from an alien perspective,
how would you communicate with other lifelike organisms? You perhaps have to find
endpoints on this interaction between the DNA and its manifestations in terms of the human mind
and the how it interacts with the environment. So get some kind of, all right, what is this DNA?
What is this environment? I have to get in somehow to like interact with it to get to perturb the
system to where these little ants, human like ants get like excited and figure and see stuff out.
Yeah, yeah. And then somehow steer them. First of all, for investigative purposes,
understand like oftentimes to understand the system, you have to perturb it.
Exactly. It's like poke at it to get excited or not. And then the other ways you want to,
if you worry about them, you can steer in one direction or another. And this kind of idea that
we're not taking care of our world. That's interesting. I mean, that's comforting. That's
hopeful because that means the greater intelligence, which is what I would hope,
we want to take care of us. Like we want to take care of the gorillas in the national parks in
Africa. Yeah. But we don't want to take care of cockroaches. So there's a line we draw. So you
have to hope that. Right now, we're a bunch of angry monkeys. And, you know, maybe whatever
these intelligences are, are also keeping an eye on us. You know, that you don't want a bunch of,
you know, you don't want the angry monkey troop stomping around the local galactic arm.
Do you think these folks are telling the truth? Do you think they saw what they say they saw?
I think they saw what they said they saw. But I also think they saw what they were shown.
I mean, if you go back to the whole notion of, okay, how long has this been around? It didn't
just start showing up in 1947. There are stories going back, you know, into the 1800s of people
who saw things in their farming, in their farm fields in the US. It's in local newspapers
from the 1800s. It's fascinating. But if you can go even further back, you know, so to your point
to your point of how are, how would you as a higher intelligence represent yourself
to a lesser intelligence? Well, let's go back to pre civilization. Maybe you show yourself
as the spirits in the forest. And you give messages through that. Once you get a little
bit more civilized, civilized, then you show yourself as the gods. And then your God, well,
we don't believe in God anymore, necessarily, not everybody does. So what do we believe in?
We believe in technology. So you show yourself as a form of technology, right? But the common
thread is, you're not alone. And there's something else here with you. And there's something that's,
as you said, watching you, and at least watching over your shoulder. But I think that like any
good parent, you don't tell your student everything, you make them learn. And learning requires
mistakes. Because if you tell them everything, then they get lazy.
You've looked at the brains of, or information coming from the brain of some of the people
that have had your phone counters. What's common about the brain of people who encounter your
phones? So the study started with a group of, let's say, a cohort of individuals that were
brought to me and their MRIs to ask about the damage that had been seen in these individuals.
It turns out that the majority of those patients ended up being, as far as we can tell,
Havana syndrome. And so for me, at least, that part of the story ends in terms of the injury.
It's likely almost all Havana syndrome. That's somebody else's problem now. That's not my problem.
But when we were looking at the brains of these individuals, we noticed something right in the
center of the basal ganglia in many of these individuals that at first we thought was damage.
It was basically an enriched patch of MRI dense neurons that we thought was damage.
But then it was showing up in everybody and then we looked and said, oh, it's actually not.
The other readings on these MRIs show that actually that's living tissue. That's actually
the head of the caudate and the pitamen. And at the time, and I remember even asking a good friend
of mine at Stanford who was a psychiatrist, what does the basal ganglia do? He said, oh,
the basal ganglia is just about movement and nerve and motor control. And I said, well,
that's odd because there's other papers that we were reading at the time started to suggest
that it was involved with higher intelligence and is actually downstream of the executive function
and involved with intuition and planning. And then if you think about it, if you're
going to have motor control, which is centralized in one place, motor control requires knowledge
of the environment. You don't want to move something and hit the table. Or if you're
walking across a room, you want to be aware and cognizant of what you might bump into.
So obviously, all of that planning is requires access to all the senses. It requires access
to your desires and memory, knowledge of where and what you want and desire to walk nearby. Like,
I use the example of you're at a party, you want to avoid that person, you like that person,
the waiter is about to drop something, all without thinking, you maneuver. So that actually,
all that planning is done in the basal ganglia. And it's actually now called the brain within
the brain. It's a, it's a goal processing system, subservient to executive function.
So what we think we found there was not something which allows people to talk to UFOs. I mean,
I think the UFO community took it a step too far. What I think we found was a form of
higher functioning and processing. So what we then looked at, and this was the most fascinating part
of it, we, we looked then at individuals in the families of those, let's say the index case
individuals, and we found that it was actually in families. And more so, this is the most
fascinating part. We've probably looked now at about 200 just random cases that you can download
off of databases online. You don't see this higher connectivity. You only find it in what
Kate Green would have called or has called higher functioning individuals, people who are,
I mean, he, he called them savants. I don't have the means to, we haven't done the testing.
But as it turns out, my family has it, right? We, we found it in, in me, my brother, my sister,
my mother, we found it as well in other individuals, husband and wife pairs. So statistically,
if you had a group of 20 individuals and you found two husband, wife pairs, both of whom had it,
and yet it's only found it about, we think one and 200, one and 300 individuals. The fact that two
individuals came together, two sets of individuals came together, both of whom had it implied either
a restricted breeding group or attraction. The reason why it seems to be in let's say so called
experiencers or people who claim if, if intuition is the ability to see something that other people
don't, I don't mean that in a paranormal sense, but being able to see something just in front of
you that other people might just dismiss. Well, maybe that's a function of a higher kind of
intelligence to say, well, I, I'm not looking at an artifact. I'm not looking at something that I
should just ignore. I'm seeing something and I recognize it for not what it is, but that it is
something different than it is normally found in my environment. Yeah. You know, I have a little
bit of that. I seem to see the magic in a lot of moments. Like I have a deep, it's obviously,
not obviously, but it seems to be chemical in nature that I just am excited about life. I love
life. I love like stupid things. It feels like I'm high a lot on like mushrooms or something
like that where you'd really appreciate that. So you're able, I'm able to detect something
about the environment that maybe others don't, I don't know, but like I seem to be over the top
grateful to be alive on a lot of first, a lot of stupid reasons. And that's in there somewhere.
I mean, it's kind of interesting because it really is true that our brains, the way we're
brought up, but also the genetics enables us to see certain slices of the world. And
some people are probably more receptive to anomalous information. They see the magic,
the possibility in the novel thing as opposed to kind of finding the pattern of the common
of the regular. Some people are more, wait a minute, this is kind of weird. I mean, a lot of those
people who probably become scientists too, like, huh, like there was this pattern happening over
and over and over and then something weird just happened. And then you get excited by that weirdness
and start to pull the string and discover what is at the core of that weirdness. And perhaps,
is that, maybe by way of question, how does the human perception system deal with anomalous
information, do you think? Well, it first tries to classify it and get it out of the way. If it's
not food, if it's not sex, right? If it's not in the way of my desires, or if it isn't the way of
my desires, then you focus on it. And so the, I think the question is how much spare processing
power, how much CPU cycles do we spend on things that are not those core desires?
What is the most kind of memorable, powerful UFO encounter report you've ever heard?
Just to your personal, on a personal level, like there's something that was really powerful.
Well, I mentioned the Zimbabwe one, that's particularly interesting. And one that actually
most people don't know about, but family driving down the highway, two little girls in the back,
open glass topped car, and the little girls see a craft right over their car. This is in
the middle of the day on a busy highway. The mother sees it. Nobody can, they look around,
nobody else seems to see it. So the girls take out their camera, take a picture of it.
And then they get home. They look at the picture. There's no craft, but there's a little object
about 30 feet above their car or so, probably about three feet across, kind of star shaped.
It's not the craft, but it's something else. There's obviously, there was something there.
And so what were they seeing? Were they seeing a projection? Were they seeing,
and why were only they seeing it?
And the photograph was capturing something very different than they were seeing,
but they're still an object. Can you give a little bit of context? Is this from modern day?
It's modern day. Oh yeah, they had a camera. I mean, they had a cell phone camera.
And this was like a four or five years ago. Report provided. By the way,
where's like a central place to provide a report? Is this?
Oh, there's a move on, but this isn't public. I've seen the picture.
Oh, this is something you've directly interacted with.
Yeah. Yeah. I've seen the picture.
So those moments like that, they captivate your mind.
It's so different. It doesn't fall into the standard story at all. But it also,
but in another way, it's kind of a, it's a clear renunciation of this notion that when
people see events, they don't all see the same thing. Now, we've heard this about like traffic
accidents. Different people will see the color of the car differently or the chain of events
differently. And this tells you that memory isn't anywhere near what we think it is.
But the issue around these so called UFO reports is that the same people will see a very different
thing almost as if whatever it is is projecting a, is projecting something into the mind rather
than it being real, right? Rather than it being a real manifestation, you know, material in front
of you, it's actually almost some sort of an altered virtual reality that is imposed on you.
I mean, you know, I think the company Metta and all the virtual reality companies would
love to have something like that, right? Well, you don't have to actually wear something on
your face to experience a virtual reality. What happens if you could just project it?
Well, that's the fundamental question from an alien perspective.
When you look at it, or as we humans look at ants, how does this perception system operate?
So not only how does this thing's mind operate? How does the human mind operate?
But how does it, their perception system operate so that we can like
stimulate the perception system properly to get them to think certain things? And so, you know,
that's a really important question. Humans think that, you know, the only way to communicate is in
like 3D or 4D space time, there's physical objects, or maybe you write things into some kind of
language. But there could be just so much more richness in how you can communicate. And so,
from an alien perspective, or somebody has much greater technological capabilities,
you have to figure out how do I use the skills I have to stimulate the human, the limited humans.
Right. Well, I mean, let's take the ants exam again as an example. Let's say that you wanted to
make ants practical. You wanted to use them for something, right? You wanted to use them as a
form of biological robot. Now, DARPA and other people have been trying to use insects for, you
know, turn them into biological robots. But if you wanted to, you would have to interact with their
sense of smell, right? Their pheromone system that they use to interact with each other.
So you would either create those molecules to talk to them, to make them do, I'm not saying talk to
them as if they're intelligent, but talk to them to manipulate them in ways that you want. Or if
you were advanced enough, you would use some sort of electromagnetic or other means to stimulate
their neurons in ways that would accomplish the same goal as the pheromones, but by doing it in a
sort of a telefactoring way. So let's say you wanted to telefactor with humans. You would interact
with them. And this is again, this is a technology which you could imagine possible. You could
telefactor information into the sensory system of a human, right? But then each human is a little
bit different. So either you know enough about them to tailor it to that individual, or you just
basically take advantage of whatever the sensory net is that that individual has. So if you happen
to be good at sound, or you happen to be a very visually inclined individual, then maybe the
sensory information that you get that's most effective in terms of transmitting information
would come through that portal. I think the aliens would need to figure out the human's value
physical consistency. So we've discovered physics. So we want our perception to make sense. Maybe
they don't, they haven't, you know, that's not an obvious fact of perception that you have to figure
out what kind of things are humans used to observing in this particular environment of
earth? And how do we stimulate the perception system in a way that's not anomalous or not too
or not too, doesn't cross that threshold of just like, well, that's way too weird. Right. So they
have to, I mean, that's not obvious that that should be important. You know, maybe you want to
err on the side of anomaly, like lean into the weirdness. So communication is complicated.
Yeah. Well, that's why I always, I always find this issue of people talking about the so called
grays as interesting because it is related to what you're saying. They're different enough.
But they're not so different as to be scary, right? They're not venom dripping fangs, right?
They're different enough. But they, they all it's also like they're, they're what you could imagine
us becoming in some distant future. So is that a purposeful representation? I don't know. I mean,
I don't believe in the grays, for instance, but I believe that people think that they see it.
So if we're talking about a communication strategy that says, you know, we're, we're like you, but
not the same as you, this might be a manifestation that you, that you represent in terms of a
communication strategy. What do you make of David's favorite sighting of the Tic Tac UFO
and other pilots who have seen these objects that seem to defy the laws of physics?
Well, I think you have to take them at their word.
Are they fascinating to you? Oh, absolutely. No, I know, I know a lot of these people, right? So I,
I know Lou Elizondo, Chris Mellon, the whole crowd I've been, I saw the videos about three weeks or
so before they went public. I was at a bar with Lou overlooking the Pentagon in Crystal City,
and they showed him to me and my hair stood on end. And he said, he said, this is, he said,
this is coming out soon. And I, I know one of the guys on the inside who was the Naval Intelligence
who had interviewed all of these pilots again before this came out. And it was hair raising
to hear this. But also exciting that, you know, here's not just people's testimony,
these are credible individuals. And if you've seen the 60 minute episode with some of the pilots,
you know, they have no monetary gain, if anything, they've got negative gain from coming out. But
then you also have all of those simultaneous ship analysis from the USS Princeton and the
radar analysis, et cetera. So, you know, at the end of the day, it's just data. It's not a conclusion.
I'd be perfectly happy, honestly, perfectly happy if somebody showed that it was all a hoax.
Can I go back to my day job? Right?
That could be a hoax, but other things might not be. I mean, this is the point. I mean,
this is why it's nice to remove some of the stigma about this topic because it's all just data and
anomalous events are such that there's going to be, they're going to be rare in terms of how much
data they represent. But we have to consider the full range of data to discover the things that
actually represent something that's, if we pull at it, we'll discover something that's extraterrestrial
or something deep about the phenomena on Earth that we don't yet understand.
Right. Well, if it only stimulates people, for instance, to think, okay, well, what happens
if we could move like that with momentumless movement? And it stimulates young individuals to
go into the sciences to ask those questions. That to me is fascinating. I mean, after I've been
openly talking about this in the last year especially, I've had a number of students from
top schools who aren't my students come to me and say, if I can help, let me. How can I help?
I never had thought about this before, but you opened, you and others, not just you and others,
have opened my mind to thinking about this matter.
Yeah, that's why it's actually funny that Elon Musk doesn't think too much about this
these kinds of propulsion systems that could defy the laws of physics as we currently understand
them. To me, it's a powerful way to think what is possible. It's inspiring, even if some of the
data doesn't represent extraterrestrial vehicles, I think the observation itself,
it's like something you mentioned, which is hypothesizing, imagining these things,
considering the possibility of these things, I think opens up your mind in a way that ultimately
can create the technology. First, you have to believe the technology is possible before you
can create it. Right. In my own lab, we always look for, as I've said before, what is inevitable?
And saying, inevitably, this is the kind of data we need, but if we need that kind of data,
the instrument we want doesn't exist. Okay, so I imagine the perfect instrument, I can't make it,
and you back into something which is practical. And then you, in a sense, reverse engineer the
future of what it is that you want to make. And I've started and sold like at least half a dozen
or more companies using that basic premise. And so it was always something that didn't exist
today, but we imagined what we wanted. And at the time, many people said it couldn't be done.
I mean, for instance, all the gene therapy that's done today with retroviruses
came from a group meeting in David Baltimore's lab, I was a postdoc with him. And one of the
other postdocs wasn't able to make retroviruses in a way that he wanted to. And I realized I had
a cell line that would allow us to make retroviruses in two days rather than two months. And so he and
I then worked together to make that system. And now all gene therapy with retroviruses is done
using this basic approach around the whole world, because something couldn't be done.
And we wanted to do it better. And we imagined the future. And so that's, I think,
what the whole UFO phenomenon is doing for people is like, well, let's imagine a future
where these kinds of technologies are, but also let's imagine a future where we don't blow
ourselves up, right? So if these things are there, they manage to not blow themselves up.
So it means that at least one other civilization got past the inflection point.
So if some of the encounters are actually representing alien civilizations visiting us,
why do you think they're doing so? You suggested that perhaps it's the study
understand their own past, right? What are some of the motivations, do you think? And again,
from our perspective, us as humans, what motivations would we have when we approach
other civilizations we might discover in the future?
Well, I think one motivation might be to steer us away from the precipice, right? Or on the assumption
that even if we make it past the precipice, at least we're not a bunch of psychopaths
running around. So maybe there's a little bit of motivation there to make sure that the neighbor
that's growing up next to you is not unruly. But maybe it's sort of a moral imperative,
like what we have with creating national parks where animals can continue to live out their
lives in a natural way. I don't know. The problem is we're imagining from an anthropomorphic viewpoint
what an alien might think. And as I've said before, alien means alien, right? I mean,
not Hollywood aliens, but a whole different way of thinking and a whole different level of experience
and let's say wisdom, hopefully, that we could only hope to understand. Now, but if we ever get
out there, if we ever make it past our current problems, and even if we don't have faster than
light travel, and even if we're only using ram scoops or light sails to get where we want to go,
and it takes us 10,000 years to get somewhere or to spread out, we might encounter such things.
And we're just going to stomp all over it, like we did in colonial South America or Africa or all
the rest on our current path, likely. And so what are we going to learn?
Well, we're getting better and better at understanding what is life. And I think we're
getting better and better at being careful not to step on it when we see it. And this is one of
the nice things about talking about UFOs is it expands the overton window, it expands our
understanding of what possibly could be life. It gets us to think, it gets the scientific community
to think. When we go to Mars, when we go to these different moons that possibly have life,
you know, we're not looking at legged organisms, we're looking at some kind of complexity
that arises in resistance to the natural world. And there's a lot of interesting...
I like that resistance to the natural world. Yeah.
Somehow there's a rebellious process, complex system going on here. And I don't know, you know,
the many ways it could take form. And there's a sense, you know, for aliens that
as the technology develops, they take form more and more as information, as something that can
influence the space of ideas, of the processing of data itself. So I just, this idea of embodiment
that we humans so admire, physically visible, perceivable embodiment may be a very inefficient
thing. Right. If you think just about, you know, your area, AI, you know, we're trying to make smaller
and smaller and smaller circuitry that is basically closer and closer to the physics of how the
universe operates, right, right down at the level of, I mean, quantum computers are basically
right down about quantum information storage. So fast forward 10,000, 100,000 years,
maybe somebody found a way to embody AI directly into the physics of the universe, right? And it
doesn't require physical manifestation. It just sits in space time. It's just a locally ordered
space. We're just locally ordered space time, right? You know, I mean, people, but maybe they
found a way to embody it there. They probably have to get really good at not, you know, trampling on
the ants. The better your technology gets, the easier it is to accidentally like, oops,
just destroy these simpleton biological systems. We constantly think about whatever these things
might be. We think that they are some sort of a unified force. Well, maybe they're not unified.
Maybe they are as disparate as you and I are. And maybe what keeps them from stomping all over
the ants is each other, right? That they are in a self tension to prevent one or more of them from
running amok. Oh, yeah. I mean, that's kind of the anarchy of nations that we have on earth. So
there's always, there's always going to be this hierarchy, this hierarchy that's formed
of greater and greater intelligences. And they're all probably also wondering,
wait, what's bigger than me? Exactly. That's what I always wonder is that maybe that they're,
what keeps them in line is something that is beyond them. Like what created the universe?
I mean, that's probably a question that bothers them too. What about the communication task itself?
How hard do you think it is for aliens to communicate with humans? So is this something you
think about about this barrier of communication between biological systems and something else?
How difficult is it to find a common language?
Well, I think if you're smart enough, or technologically enabled enough, it's relatively
straightforward. Now, whether your concepts can ever be dumbed down to us, that might be hard.
Again, talking to the ants. Talking to the ants. On Instagram.
You want to look good in this picture? Let me explain to you why.
Yeah. So that's the essential problem of, perhaps they realize who it is that they're
talking to. And they say, rather than muddy the picture, we're only going to give them
limited information. Yeah. Right. And yeah, maybe we could sit down like you and I and have a
conversation. But then they would make assumptions. The humans would then make assumptions about us
that aren't true. Because we're not humans. Right? So let's stay at arm's length. Let's
just let them know that we're here. Right? And here's the limited amount of communication.
Again, this notion that if you give somebody everything, they'll get lazy. And if they've
been around as long as they have, they've seen every kind of thing that can go wrong.
And so it's, they know as much as they might want to step in, that would be a wrong thing.
Yeah. You have to also understand that the amount of wisdom they carry.
Yeah. And so it's very easy as well for religions to, I don't want to get
into a whole religious conversation, but you could, very easy for, you could see how religions
could call them angels or devils or what have you. Because again, if you're trying to fit it into a
framework of cultural understanding, the first thing you reach for is God. And so it, when you,
when you look at what these things are, and again, with the angels and the devils,
in a similar sort of way, their communication is limited. They just kind of give little,
what's the oracle of Delphi? They kind of give these Delphic pronouncements. And then it's up to
you to figure out what it is that they really mean. Stephen Greer claimed that a skeleton
discovered in Atacama region of Chile might be an alien. You reached out to him and
took on the task of proving or disproving that with the rigor of science. The result is a paper
titled, Whole Genome Sequencing of Atacama Skeleton Shows Novel Mutations Linked with Displasia.
Can you tell this full story? The story was, as you put it right there, correct. Reached out,
got a sample of the body, did the DNA sequencing, then worked with a team of two other Stanford
scientists and Roche Sequencing Group, Roche Diagnostics, and probably a total team of about
11 or so people. And as is standard in these kinds of things, the professors actually don't do the
work. The students do the work and figured out the answer. And then we helped them put together the
story. And the story was simply that it was human, 100%. I went into it thinking it was originally
a monkey of some sort. I got kind of excited a few months into the process thinking, well,
what happens if it is an alien, right? Can you describe some of the characteristics of the
skeleton that make it unique and interesting? Primarily, it had dysmorphias of the brain.
And so the first thing I did, actually, when I got pictures of it, I took it to a local expert at
Stanford, and he was on the paper. And he was the world expert in pediatric bone dysmorphias.
He literally wrote the book on this, because that's what you do. You go to an expert when
he's outside of your field of interest. And he said, well, I haven't seen this particular
collection of mutations before, or this physiology before, but here's what I think it might be.
And he said, but based on the size of the thing and the bone density,
it would appear to be like six or seven years old. Now, again, that's the thing where I think the
lay public doesn't understand or takes a speculation like that and turns it into a fact.
No one ever said that it was that age. We only said that the bones made it look like it was that age.
But then we went back and looked for genetic explanations of why things might look the way
they did. And if you, again, read the paper is very carefully caveated to say that these mutations
might result in this. But what we did find was an unexpectedly large number of mutations associated
with bone growth in this individual. And it was just a bad role of the dice, right? You roll
the dice enough times with enough people born every year, and someone will roll the wrong dice
all at once. So the sad part about it was individuals in the UFO community who wanted to
think that there was some sort of conspiracy around it, right? That somebody had somehow
convinced all of my students to lie. I mean, come on. I would lose my job, first of all,
and they would all be in trouble forever. Yeah. But also it's just projecting malevolence
onto people that I don't think exist in normal populace and especially doesn't exist in the
scientific community. The kind of people that go into science, I mean, this is what bothers me
with the current distrust of science, is they might be naive. They might not, especially modern
science, look at the big picture, philosophical ethical questions, all that kind of stuff. But
ultimately, they're people with integrity and just a deep curiosity for the discovery of cool,
little things. And there's no malevolence, broadly speaking, in the scientific community. So I mean,
there's a bigger story here, which is there's a hunger in the populace to discover something
anomalous, something new. And science has to be both open to the anomalous, but also to reject
the anomalous when the data doesn't support it. What do you make of that walking that line for
you? Because you're dealing with UFO encounters, you're dealing with UFOs, you're dealing with
UFO encounters, you're dealing with the anomalous. Well, people have said, let's go back to the
Atacama case that I was debunking it. Well, debunking is a loaded term, sort of assumes that
you were going in purposefully to prove something is wrong. I wasn't, I was just going in to collect
the data. And, you know, I showed that this one was human. There was another skull that somebody
had at one point, it was called the Star Child, they called it the Star Child skull. I said,
you know, I looked at it, I looked at the DNA sequencing that they had done. I said, this is
human. End of story. The people who owned the thing at the time disagreed with me. And then
eventually, another group came in and proved that I was right. And it's not about debunking. It's
about getting the more spectacular and hyped cases off the table. I mean, the reason I got
interested in it is because somebody was hyping it. And not because I wanted to disprove it,
but because I just wanted to know. And let's get it off the table, because it's usually
the most extravagant things that are most likely to be wrong. Somewhere in the rubble will be
something interesting. And so that's what you do. You get the, you get the, the, the dross off the
table. And then somewhere in the data will be something worth real inquiry. And that if you
inquire deeply enough will be extravagant. Yes. Exactly. And that's what actually excites scientists
is to, I mean, you want with the rigor of science to actually reveal the extravagant.
And so look at CRISPR as probably the most perfect example of that. These weird sequences
in bacterial genomes all arrayed one after the other with these strange sequences around them.
But when you looked at the sequences, they looked like viruses. And so how did they get there?
And lo and behold, after, you know, a lot of effort and work, well, a couple of Nobel prizes
went out the door, but these strange things ended up having extraordinarily extravagant
possibilities. You've also looked at UFO materials. You are in possession of UFO
materials yourself. Claimed UFO materials. Alleged. Alleged UFO materials. That's right. So
what's another term? Weird materials that don't seem to have a story. They have a
story that doesn't seem to be of natural origins, but it's not, you know, there's a process to
proving that. And that process may take decades, if not centuries, because you have to keep
pulling at the string and discover where they could possibly come from. But anyway, you're
in possession of some materials of this kind. Can you describe some of them? And maybe also
talk to the process of how you investigate them? How do you analyze them? Right. So let's say that
there's two classes of materials that I've been given by people and not given by like the government
or anything, just given people who've collected them. And there's a reasonable chain of evidence
associated with them that you believe is not just a pebble, somebody picked up off a road.
There are almost always things that people have claimed have either been dropped off as like some
sort of a leftover material, molten metals, or they are from an object that was released from this,
so that kind of exploded. They're almost always metals. I have some couple of things that might
be biological that are interesting that I haven't really spent a lot of time on yet.
When you look at a metal, you basically, well, okay, what are the elements in it? And what's
it made of? And so there's pretty standard approaches to doing that. Most of them involve
a technology called mass spectrometry. And there's probably about five or six different kinds of
mass spectrometry that you could bring to bear on answering it. And they either tell you, depending
upon the limit of the resolution of the instrument, they either tell you the elements that are there,
or they tell you the isotopes that are there. And you're interested not just in knowing whether
something is there or not, you're interested in knowing whether there are, you know, the
amounts of it. And in the case of elements, how many different isotopes are there? And that's
kind of where in some of these cases, it gets interesting, right? Because in at least one of
the materials, as we first studied it, the isotope ratios of in this case, it was magnesium or way
off normal. And I just don't know why it doesn't it doesn't prove anything. It just all it proves is
that it was probably accomplished by some kind of an industrial process, whether it's the result
of a process or whether and this is sort of the leftover, or whether it was made that way
for a particular purpose. I don't know. All I know is that it it was engineered.
That's it, right? But then it's the question is, sort of you go one step deeper. Why would you
engineer it? Right? Well, why? And what does the engineered means? There's all kinds of,
it could be a byproduct, it could be the main result of an engineering process.
It would be a small part of the engineering process that is the main part.
Well, so the ratios of isotopes for any given element are basically the result of stellar
processes. Supernova blew up sometime several tens, you know, several billion years ago. That
became a cloud. Those atoms coalesced gravitationally to form another sun and a ring that became a
rocky planet. And the ratios of the isotopes were determined at the time of that explosion.
And so everything in the local solar system is more or less of that ratio, depending upon certain
gravitational difference. But by fragments of a percent, not whole tens of percent difference.
So what do humans use isotopes for? Mostly to blow stuff up. I mean, the vast majority of the
isotopes that have been made in the per pound or ton are things like certain ratios of plutonium,
and uranium to blow stuff up. We don't make or engineer isotopes, which it's today is relatively
easy to do, but it's still expensive. For any other reason, apart from, let's say, as anti cancer,
we use stable isotopes and money these days as a counterfeiting tool. You basically embed
certain ratios of isotopes in to make it harder for counterfeiters to accomplish.
And so, but other than that, we don't do anything with that. So why would you make
grams of such material in this one case and drop it around on a beach in Brazil?
So which case are we talking about? This is the this is the uva tuba case.
Can you describe this case a little bit further? Like what material we're talking about,
just the full story of the case. So it's an interesting one.
It's an interesting one. So a fisherman saw an object that released something or it exploded.
And it was this relative, I've got some big chunks of it, relatively pure magnesium
with obviously something else in it because magnesium burns. So it had something in it that
would other metals, simple alloy, that would prevent it from basically burning up. And so the
question is, and so then we had we had two pieces that came from two different chains of custody,
both claimed to be from the same object, at least physically, when you look at the two
things, they look the same, right? So we took small fragments of each of them,
we put them in an instrument called a secondary ion mass spec, which is an extremely sensitive
instrument. And it can see down to 0.0001 mass units, which is important for, let's say,
more arcane reasons, but it's a sensitive instrument. And so one of the chains of custody,
we had two pieces from the same chain of custody, and then two pieces from the other chain of custody,
one of them had completely normal magnesium isotope ratios, magnesium 24, 25, 26,
and the other was off, not just like slightly off, way off, and they were both off to the same
extent. So, I mean, it was sort of like you had an internal control of what was normal,
then you had this other one, which was, which was wrong. And so you're left with kind of an
open question. Was this a hoax? Were these two chains of custody, one of them a hoax,
that somebody purposefully introduced those things? Because you could do it. It would
cost a lot. I mean, at the time that this was found, I guess the 1970s or so,
might have been earlier, I forget. The amount that I had would have cost several tens of thousands
of dollars to make. And again, it's not something you would just throw around. And why would you
do it in the hope that some guy 30 years from then would pick it up and study it?
Yeah, it's a very subtle, subtle draw. Yeah, it's a long term plan. So, I just don't know,
I just don't know what to make of it, except it's interesting. But it's, so a different
kind of question that you're asking is, what constitutes evidence, right? So, is this
sufficient evidence? Absolutely not. But somebody's put it forward, I have the time,
it's my time. I'll study it. And I, my objective is to sort of take those that I think are credible
enough and do a reasonable analysis, put it out there. And maybe somebody else will come up with
an idea as to what it is. Now, what would be better is some sort of true technology, right?
Something that is obviously, we don't have it. You know, and people like Neil deGrasse Tyson
and Seth Shostak have come out rightfully and have said, you know, when you show up with,
you know, something really obviously technology that we don't understand,
you know, then we'll pay attention, right? Not just material. Not just material. A piece of
metal is, is interesting. But, and several of the things that I've looked at and things that
people, other things that people have come to me with, we've found to be completely banal,
or we're actually pieces of aircraft that were invented back in the 1940s. And so, take them
off the table. See, but I think, again, I think showing up with technology that humans would
find completely novel is actually a really difficult task for aliens, because it obviously
can't be so novel that we don't recognize it. For what it is. Yeah. For what it is. And so,
and I would say most of the technology aliens likely have would be something we don't recognize.
So they, it's actually a hard problem how to convince ants. Like, you first have to understand
what ants are tweeting about, like what, what they care about in order to like inject into their
culture. Because, you know, that's why I think it would be the technology that you could present
is in the space of ideas is in the, is try to influence individual humans with the encounters
and try to, with this kind of thing that you mentioned about us not taking messages about us
not taking care of the world. It's difficult to, I mean, I, to, for them to understand,
you have to come up with trinkets that impress us. I mean, maybe the very technology, the fascination
with the development of technology and the development of technology, the actual act of
innovation itself is the thing that they're communicating. Right. I mean, this is kind
of what, you know, Jacques Valais thinks about is the role of the control system. He calls it
the control system. Well, let me ask about Jacques. Who is he? You know him. Who is Jacques Valais?
What have you learned from him about life, about about UFOs, about technology, about our
role in the universe? Well, I met Jacques actually soon after the whole Atacama thing happened.
And I was visited by those people associated with the government and the whatever around the
Havana, what ended up mostly being Havana syndrome patients, but also Jacques at the
same time. And they were actually working behind the scenes with each other that, oh, here's this
Stanford professor who is willing to talk about this stuff and investigate things.
Maybe we should go talk to him. And he, he reached out through a colleague and, you know,
I had lunch actually at the Rosewood Inn upon near Sandhill. So Jacques is one of the first
openly active scientists. And he's really a scientist in this area, going back to the 1960s.
And, you know, he's put forward a number of ideas, speculations about what it might be
that people are interacting with. And he, the first thing that I learned from him is this
notion of what he called Kabuki Theater, that many of the things that people have seen are,
I remember reading his books and thinking, he uses this word absurd a lot.
He said, the things that people claim they see are absurd, right? A ship doesn't land
in a farmer's field, and then come up and knock on the door and say, can I have a glass
of water? And these are stories literally out of newspapers from the 1930s. It's absurd.
You know, and the other thing that people say, ships don't crash. If you're so technologically
advanced, you don't crash. It's absurd that they crash. So he says, this is put on as a show.
It's meant to, it's an influence campaign, right? It's, it's not meant to influence individuals,
it's meant to influence a culture as a whole. Maybe they don't look at us as individuals,
maybe they look at us as an organism that lives on a planet, right?
And perhaps rightly so. And so that's how you interact with them. That's how you influence
them. So that was one of the first things that kind of took me back and realized, wow, there's
actually a, maybe there's a puppet master behind the scenes that's, you know, doing this influencing
that all this stuff about aliens is just, is not true per se. They're just a representation of
something that is meant to influence. So that was probably the most interesting thing. I mean,
the man is brilliant. He's also, it can be, and I'm sorry, Jacques, he can also be incredibly
annoying to have a conversation with because he will pick apart your arguments or anything that
you think you know, and show you why you don't know what you think you know. And he uses the,
he used the example that for me, that is, is all you need is one counter example to any
conclusion, and you're wrong. And so I learned from him, I mean, I'm supposed to be a good
scientist, but I learned from him, don't talk about conclusions, just talk about the data.
Because data is not wrong. I mean, convince yourself that the data is not wrong or not an
artifact, but be careful about your conclusions because whatever is going on, it's, it's much
more complicated than we, than we imagine. Well, that's powerful. Being able to always step back
because we get, we humans get excited. Yeah. We start to jump to conclusions from the data,
but always step back. Well, powerful. Being able to always step back because we get, we humans
get excited. Yeah. We start to jump to conclusions from the data, but always step back. Well,
in some of my Twitter feeds, when I dare to go on Twitter are full of, well, when are you going
to give us the answer? Well, you know, science is not immediate. You're going to have to be patient.
And even some of my science colleagues have said, well, where's the data? My answer then has been,
where's been your work to try to produce any? You know, I'm not here to give you everything
on a silver platter. We talked offline, how much I love data and machine learning and so on.
And it's been really disheartening to see the US government not invest as much as they possibly
could into this whole process. So let's jump to the most recent thing, which is what do you make
of the report titled preliminary assessment on identified aerial phenomena that was released
by the office of the director of national intelligence in June, 2021. So this was like,
okay, we're going to step back. And we're going to like what, where do we stand and where do we
hope the future is? What do you make of that report? Is it hopeful? Is it? I see it is very
hopeful, very hopeful. I think the adults are finally stepping up in and being in charge, right?
In the good sense of adult. What's that? In the good sense of adult. Childlike curiosity is pretty
powerful thing. That's true. Yeah. It's, but it's also, I think the people who were worried
that the populace at large might run screaming into the streets and riot.
You know, they have, you know, they basically, the empiric evidence is they're wrong.
You know, this, these videos and all these things have been out for now, what, five years?
Most people don't even know about it, right? So as, as, as hyped as it's been and all over
the newspapers that it's been and et cetera, you know, even Tucker Carlson has talked about it many
times on his news program. Joe Rogan has a lot of people don't know about it. So I think people,
if it's not affecting their day to day life, they're going on with their day to day life.
So, but that said, I think it was an important sea change in the internal discussions going on in
the government because, and the reason being that I think this is actually partly true with the,
the maturation of human social technology. It was becoming so obvious that this stuff was
showing up again and again and again around our ships. They just couldn't keep it quiet anymore.
Right. And so it's like, we need to do something about it. And Lou Elizondo and Chris and others
to their great credit found the right angle to talk about this. It says, well, okay, let's say
it's not out there. Maybe it's the Russians, the Chinese or somebody else, we should know about this
because we damn sure know it's not us. So that to me is an important thing to, to finally be a
little bit more open about the matter. But like I often say, I'm not looking for people to give
me permission to do anything. I'm just going to do the analysis myself with what I have.
Avi Loeb has taken the same approach. He said, I'm not going to wait for the government to give me
telescopic information about technologies or things that might be even on our own solar system.
I'm just going to collect it myself. And, and that's the right way to do it. Right. Don't
wait for somebody else to give it to you. It's also possible to inspire a large number of people
to do a wider spread data collection. Yes. I mean, you yourself can't do a large enough data
collection that would, if you're talking about anomalous events, right, right, you should be
collecting high resolution data about everything that's happening on earth in terms of like,
in terms of the kind of things that would indicate to you a strong signal that something weird
happened here. And this is why governments can be good at funding large scale efforts.
Yes. I mean, NASA and so on working with SpaceX with Blue Origin to fund
capitalistic sort of fund companies, fund company efforts to do huge moonshot projects.
Right. And in the same way, do huge moonshot data collection efforts in terms of UFOs. I mean,
we're not, it needs to be like 10x, like one or two orders of magnitude more funding to do this
kind of thing. And I understand on the flip side of that, if you make it about what are the Russians,
whether the Chinese doing, you know, make it a question of geopolitics, it gets touchy because
now you, you kind of taken away from the realm of science and making it military, making it
military. Some of the greatest, this is what makes me as an engineer, makes me truly sad that some
of the greatest engineering work ever done is by Lockheed Martin. And we will never know about it.
Yeah, I agree. I agree. I wish we were, it was different, but it's the world we live in.
You know, but related to that UIP task force announcement that you just said, you know,
the bill was passed in the Department of Defense and now it formally establishes an office to
collate that information and also to be transparent about it. Money is now set aside.
Right. Well, what do you think of just in case people don't know the DOD establishing new department
to study UFOs called airborne naming, come on. But yes, airborne object identification and
management synchronization group. Do you know how to pronounce that? No, I do not. AOI MSG.
It's stupid and needs to be renamed, but AOI MSG AO, all right, is directed by the
Undersecretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security. What do you make of this office?
Are you hopeful about this office? I think there's still a tug of war going on behind the scenes
as to who's going to control this. But I do know though that money has been set aside that
will be used to make things more public, right, to start to get others involved. And you know,
there's, I'm involved with an effort to get other academics involved.
So you think there might be some of that money could be directed towards funding, maybe like
groups like yours to do some research here. So they would be open to that, you think?
I hope so. I mean, nothing is set in stone yet. And I'm not hiding anything because I just don't
know anything, right? But I do think that there will be public efforts. Now, there are being
set up other private efforts to bring monies involved and to use that to leverage and get
access to some of the internal resources as well. So what you're seeing is kind of an ecosystem
building up in a positive sense of people who are willing to do the research. So, you know,
before it would be, you couldn't even go to a scientist and ask them to help.
Now, if there's money, as I said before, scientists are essentially capitalists. We go
where the money is. I mean, the work that I've done, I did out of my own pocket.
And probably about $50,000, $60,000, $70,000 of money went into the paper we published
out of my own pocket. But the amount of money that needs to go in is in at least the few
millions to do a proper analysis of these materials. The work I know that the Galileo
project is involved with, it's probably in the five to 10 million range to get stuff done.
But that's actually a relatively modest amount of money to accomplish something that has been in
the zeitgeist for decades. I should also push back a little bit on something you probably will
agree with. You said scientists are essentially capitalists. What I've noticed is there's certainly
an influence of money. But oftentimes when you're talking about basic research and basic science,
the money is a little bit ambiguous to what direction you're doing the research in.
And the scientists get really good at telling a narrative of like, yeah, yeah, yeah,
we're fulfilling the purpose of this funding. But they end up doing really what they're curious
about. And of course, you cannot deviate like, if you're getting funded to study penguins and
Antarctica, you can't start building rockets, but probably you can because you'll convince some kind
you concoct the narrative saying, rockets are really important for studying penguins in the
entire right. I think that's actually, this is one thing I think people don't generally understand
about the scientific mind is I don't know how capitalistic it is, because if it was,
they would start an FN company. No, no, no, no. I mean, when I meant capitalist, I didn't mean
in the, they'll start companies per se. I mean, we can only do the research where there's money.
And so from, you know, maybe it's a bad use of the term capitalist. So, but the,
we will only do the research where there's money. I mean, why do most people work,
many biologists work in cancer research, because there's a lot of money there. It's an important
problem. But I might not have ever gotten involved in it. If there wasn't money, I might have gone
and I was going to be a botanist when I, when I was a kid. That's what I wanted to do. So,
having money available will bring people to bear. Now, another mistake that's often actually made,
I think, by the lay public about science is that people think that we're paid to do things.
Just as you said, I get a research grant and luckily from the NIH there, they give you a fair
amount of latitude. I will go my own way and I'll find something, I might have proposed something,
but I'll end up somewhere entirely different by the end of the project. And that's how good
science is done. You follow the, you follow the data, you follow the results. And so that's what
I'm hoping can be done here. I think the worst kind of thing that could be done with this
subject area is to put it inside another company where they have a set plan of what it is they're
going to do and the scientists either tell, do what the executives tell them to do or not.
That isn't how anything will really get discovered. Put it, get it out into the public,
get open minds thinking about it and then publishing on it and doing the right kind
of work. That's how real progress will be made with this.
Let's again put our sort of philosophical hats on. Do you think the US government or some other
government is in possession of something of extraterrestrial origin that is far more impressive
than anything we've seen in the public? I've not seen anything personally,
but if I believe the people who I don't think can lie, yes.
How does that make you feel in terms of the way government works, the way our human civilization
works, that there might be things like that and they're not public? Is there a hopeful message
for transparency that's possible? If you were in power, and I'm not saying president because
maybe the president is not the source of power here, would you release this information in some
way or form? Yes, if I were. I think it's something that can bring humanity together.
I think that knowledge of this kind of thing to know that we are more alike than we are different
in comparison to whatever this is is a positive thing for us. I don't necessarily
care that the government has been hiding it and I think people who've been talking about
we should give government officials or whatever amnesty, I think that's probably the right
answer. This isn't a time to look back and say you did something wrong. You did whatever you
did because that was the data you had available to you at the time and you had good reasons for
doing it. Now, if your reasons were selfish, if your reasons were you wanted to do it because
you wanted to monetize it yourself to your benefit but against that of others, then I think maybe
there's something else that could be said but an opportunity to get all this information out,
if I were in charge, I would try to do it. Now, I might be shown something though that says there's
a reason why you don't want to let anybody know this. Maybe you don't want everybody having access
to unlimited energy because maybe you might turn it into a bomb or something that gives you hints
that something like unlimited energy is possible but you haven't figured it out yet and if you
make it public, maybe some of the other governments you have tensions with will figure it out first.
It's kind of an arms race going on, I think. In all forms and it makes me truly sad because
it's obvious that for example, the origins of the COVID virus, it's obvious to me that the
Chinese government, whatever the origins are, is interested in not releasing information about it
because it can only be bad for the Chinese government. Every government thinks like this.
Every actually, this has been disappointment to me talking to PR folks at companies. They're
always nervous. They're always conservative in the sense like, well, if we release more stuff,
it can only be bad. Then an Elon Musk character comes along who tweets ridiculous memes
and doesn't give a fuck. I've been encouraging CEOs, I've been encouraging people to be
transparent. Of course, government is national security is really another level,
it's human lives at stake, but let's start at the lighter case of just releasing some of the
awesome insights of how the sausage is made, the technology and being transparent about it
because it excites people. Like you said, it connects people. It inspires them. It's good
for the brand. It's good for everybody. I honestly think this kind of idea that people will steal
the information and we use it against you is an idea that's not true in this idea of the 20th
century. Like you said, some of the benefits of the social media, our social world is that
transparency is beneficial and I hope governments will learn that lesson. Of course,
they're usually the last to learn such lessons. What do you make of Bob Lazar's story in terms
of possession of aircraft? Do you believe him? I don't believe in the Bob Lazar story, to be
quite honest. I mean, Jeremy Corbell has done a great job interviewing him and has done some
beautiful documentaries. I don't know how to interpret it. Again, there's some of the people
who I fraternize with think it's all rubbish. Maybe he's right, but I don't know. I mean,
the problem is, and this is a little bit different about how I approach the whole area than a lot
of others, I'm less interested in going over old paperwork and all these old histories of who said
what the whole he said, she said of the history of UFOs. I'm a scientist. I worked on the brain
area because it's something I can collect data on. I can go back to the same individual,
collect an MRI again, and redo it. I can hand that MRI to somebody else. They can analyze it.
I can get materials. I can analyze them. I can get some of these skeletons. I won't touch any
skeletons ever again, but I can analyze it and somebody else can reproduce the data. I mean,
that's what I'm good at. I'm not going to go into the whole, I'm not a historian.
Yeah, that's true, but there's a human side to it. Sometimes I think with these, because again,
anomalous, rare events, some of the data is inextricably connected to humans, the observations.
Right. I mean, I hope in the future that sensory data will not be polluted by human
subjectivity, but that's still powerful data, even direct observations, like if you talk
about pilots. It's an interesting question to me whether Bob Azar is telling the truth,
whether he believes he's telling the truth too, and also what impact his story and stories like
his have on the willingness of governments to be transparent and so on. You have to credit
his story for captivating the imagination of people and getting the conversation going.
He's maintained his story for all these years with little to no change that I'm aware of.
But there's so many other people who are, let's say, experts in that story.
They're gut, you accumulate a set of circumstantial evidence where your
gut will say that somebody is not telling the truth. Yeah.
You mentioned Avi Loeb. I forgot to ask you about Omomua. Because you've analyzed specimens
here on earth, what do you make of that one? And what do you make broadly of our efforts
to look at rocks, essentially, or look at objects flying around in our solar system?
Is that a valuable pursuit, or maybe most of the fascinating things could be
discovered here on earth or on other nearby planets?
Just going to Omomua, I think Avi's insight is an interesting speculation, right?
Like I was saying before, people can sometimes look at something and not see it for what it is.
Many would just look at that and say, oh, it's an asteroid and dismiss it.
There was something odd about the data that Avi picked up on and said, well, here's an
alternative explanation that actually better fits the models than it just being a rock.
And to his credit, he just has ignored the critics because he believes the data is real
and is using that then as a battering ram to go after other things. So I think that's great.
Yeah. What is his main conclusion? Does he say it could be of alien extraterrestrial origin?
Well, that's one of the things. I mean, he's explained how it could be a light sail.
And a light sail is certainly within near human capabilities to make such a thing.
I think Yuri Milner, he's a Russian billionaire. He's involved, I think,
in a project to make light sails with laser, to launch them with laser power, essentially,
towards Alpha Centauri. So it's something that humans could make. I think Avi's proposal is
perfectly within the realm of possibility. Sadly, the thing is now nearly out of our solar system.
Yes. I mean, to me, that's inspiring to do greater levels of data collection in our solar system,
but also here on Earth. It just seems like we should be constantly collecting data because
the tools of software that we're developing get better and better at dealing with huge amounts
of data. It's changing the nature of science. I mean, collect all of the data.
Right. Collect the data. I mean, the Galileo project asked me over the weekend to join,
and I did. So I'm not a specialist in any of the stuff that they're doing,
but in looking at the list of people who are on there, there are really no biologists on there.
So at some point, if my expertise is required for something.
What's the goal and the vision of the Galileo project?
Better talk to Avi, but my understanding and just actually looking at the
the bylaws this morning, literally just got them, is number one, collect the data on UAP,
and number two, collect data on local, potentially local technological artifacts.
I need to look into this. This is fascinating. And Avi is heading the Galileo project.
Yeah. Have you spoken to him on this podcast? Yes. That was before, I believe,
is before he was headed. It's a new creation. Yeah. The Galileo project was, I think it's
about six or seven months old now. That's amazing. And he's getting a group of scientists together.
Oh yeah. About a hundred. Oh, it's actually, I am, I was looking at some of their stuff over the
weekend. I'm shocked at the level of organization that they've already got put together. That's
amazing. It looks like a moonshot project. I mean, I've been involved with a lot of NIH,
large NIH projects, which involve a lot of people in coordination, and they're putting it together.
So you're extremely well published in a lot of the fields we began this conversation with.
So you're legit scientists. But yet you're keeping an open mind to a lot of ideas that
maybe require you to take a leap outside of the conventional. So what advice would you give to
young people today that are in high school or in college that are dreaming of having impact in
science or maybe in whatever career path that goes outside of the conventional that really
does something new? If you believe in something, you believe that an idea is
valuable, or you have an approach to something, don't let others shame you into not doing it.
But as I've said, shame is a societal control device to get other people to do what they want
you to do rather than what you want to do. So shame sometimes is good to stop you from
doing something unethical or wrong. But shame also is something that is circumscribing your
environment. I've never let people who've told me, you know, you shouldn't do that
line of science, you should be ashamed of yourself for even thinking that, give me a break.
I'm, you know, why is it wrong to ask questions about this area? What's wrong with asking the
question? Frankly, you're the person who's wrong for trying to stop these questions. You're the
person who's almost acting like a cultist. You basically have closed your mind to what the
possibilities are. And if I'm not hurting anybody, and if it could lead to an advance, and if it's
my time, why does it bother you? I mean, I had a very well known scientist once tell me that I
was going to hurt my career talking about this. If anything, it's enhanced my career.
I have a couple of questions on this. So first of all, just a small comment on that.
I've realized that it feels like a lot of the progress in science is done by people pursuing
an idea that another senior faculty would probably say, this is going to hurt your career. I think
it's actually a pretty good indicator that there's something interesting when a senior wise person
tells you this is going to hurt your career. I think that's just the one, as a small, if I were
to give advice to young people, if somebody's senior tells you this is going to hurt your career,
think twice about taking their advice. Yeah. I mean, I think that's the primary thing.
And the other I tell my own students, I have a lab of about 20, 30 people and has been that big
since 1992, people come and go, is it's not the data that falls in line that's so interesting.
It's the spot off the graph that you want to understand. When something is way off the graph,
that's the interesting thing because that's usually where discovery is. And the number of times that
I've stopped people in my lab and said, wait a second, go back a few slides. What was that?
And then it ended up being something interesting that made their careers. I could count on a few
hands. Yeah, get excited by the extraordinary that's outside of the thing that you've done in
the past. Just on a personal psychological level, is there, I'm sure at Stanford, I'm sure in you
exploring some of these ideas, there's pressure. How do you not give in to the pressure? How do
you not give in to the people that push you away from these topics? What would you say shame?
I just point to my successes. I say, you're the ones who told me not to start companies
all this time ago. And now you're the one coming to me for advice for how to start a company.
Yeah. Right. But from the scientific area, it's you're wanting to take something off the table
that might be an explanation. How is that the scientific method? I reverse shame them.
Reverse shame them. So purely with reason through conversation, you're able to do that. So it doesn't
feel, because to me, it would just feel lonely. There's a community. There's a community of
science. And when you're working on something that's outside a particular conventional way
of thinking, it could be lonely. I mean, there's in the AI field, if you were working on neural
networks in the 90s, it could be lonely. I have met some of the most fascinating people ever that
had I stayed the conventional track, I would never have met. I mean, truly brilliant people
because of this. So it is for those worried about, well, should I step outside of my
comfort zone, you're going to meet some really interesting people. And because I'm open about
this area, I'll go and give a talk in Boston, Harvard or MIT. And at dinner, inevitably,
this subject comes up. And inevitably, somebody else at the table will admit
both that they're interested or that they've seen something. And suddenly, the whole tone
of the conversation changes. It's kind of like there's safety in numbers. And then,
or I've had people come to me afterwards after dinner and say, hey, I don't talk about this
openly. But so the number of scientists who know that there's something else going on
is much larger than the scientific community would like to think.
That's a really powerful one, which is I don't talk about this openly. But here's what I believe.
And you'd be surprised how many people speak like this and hold those beliefs. And I am optimistic
about social media in a more connected world to reveal more and more, like us not to have these
two personalities. We're like this public and private one. We've mentioned the big questions
of the origins of the universe. What do you think is the meaning of this whole thing?
For us humans, our human existence here on Earth, or just at the individual level of a human life,
what, Gary, is the meaning of life?
I think that what we're going through today with this realization, it's kind of like you've lived on
an island, your whole life, and you've looked across the ocean and you've never imagined
there was another island with anybody else on it. And then suddenly a ship with sails shows up.
You don't understand it, but you realize that suddenly your world just got a lot bigger.
I think we're in one of those moments right now that our world view, our galactic view,
our galactic view is opening to something a little bit bigger. And not just that there might be
somebody else, but that there's something else. And what it is is yet to be understood.
And the fact that it isn't understood to me is what's exciting because I can fill it with my
dreams. And this discovery, our world might, is about to get a lot more humbling and a lot
more fascinating once we look out and realize we were on an island all along. It makes us both
smaller but larger at the same time to me. I can look outside at the stars and think
and imagine what else might be out there. And although I know that I will never see it all,
it excites me to know that it's there.
Well, Gary, both to respect your time and also because at 12 I turned into a princess.
Let me just say thank you for doing everything you're doing as a great scientist, as a person
willing to reject the conventional. And thank you for spending your extremely valuable time with
me today. Thanks for talking. Thanks so much. It was great talking. Thanks for listening to this
conversation with Gary Nolan. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the
description. And now let me leave you some words from Stanislav Lem in Solaris. How do you expect
to communicate with the ocean when we can't even understand one another? Thanks for listening and
hope to see you next time.